README.md, before:

# K Strickland's Evento App

Hello! Welcome to Evento. This app makes sure you never have to send a belated card, gift, or text ever again. It keeps track of your friends' birthdays and more, and tells you about the day's events each time you log on.

Evento is a full-stack app I built during my time at General Asssembly's Software Engineering Immersive. This was my first time building a database from scratch, and I really enjoyed diving into the back-end with Rails.

On the front-end, it was fun to think of the optimal user experience and work towards that with each new feature. By placing the user at the center of the project, I was able to think of some useful features to build that allowed me to flex a couple programming muscles I didn't know I had.

One of the best parts of this project is how much it stretched me to find answers on my own, and in the process really solidify concepts that I've been a bit unsure of.

I feel great about what I learned through this project.

Enjoy!

-K

## Technologies Used

* HTML5
* CSS3
* Bootstrap
* JavaScript
* jQuery
* Handlebars
* Ajax
* Ruby
* Rails
* Heroku
* fullcalendar.io
* moment.js

## Planning

My first step in planning this app was to determine MVP based on the requirements provided to me.

I set up a general schedule for myself with MVP features slated for the first two days of the project. I then added some scheduled time for debugging, layout, and extra features for the final two days.

As I worked through the project I identified extra features to work on, and because I hit MVP early in the project process I was able to prioritize working through the extra features I was most excited about.

## Challenges/Victories

- **Database structure**

My original plan for this project was to have a user resource, which had a one to many relationship with a friends resource (one user, many friends). I also wanted to create an events resource in a one to many relationship with friends (one friend, many events). With this being my first time building a back-end, I did not completely understand how user_id and references should work when you are dealing with owned resources.

Once I realized that I needed to add a user_id foreign key to my friend and users tables, the database change was very straightforward.

I also determined that my controllers needed to inherit from the ProtectedController, and was able to work through that configuration once I knew the end goal.

- **Populating a select dropdown with data from database**

My database is set up so that a friend has many events. If you want to create an event, you must tie it to a specific friend that you've already created. I didn't want the user to have to know the friend_id in order to create an event, so I built a solution with a select option list, handlebars, and a hidden input field. I created some methods to capture that friend_id without the user even knowing it. All they have to do is select from a dropdown list the friend they want to create the event under, and done!

- **Handlebars helpers**

These little things are so useful! I created a dateCompare helper that can tell me if an event is today, and from there display an appropriate message to my user. I also created a helper to format the dates in my app using moment.js to look like: Wednesday, September 2nd 2020.

- **Calendar view**

I made a stretch goal to display all events in calendar format for the user. I used fullcalendar.io to accomplish this. I did run into some bugs because of the fact that I was reading from old docs and certain features I was tryingt o use have been since depricated. I learned the importance of making sure you're in the right doc version :)

I'm proud of my updateCalendar function, which uses store as well as a .render() and .destroy() method to display an up-to-date calendar populated with all the user's events on the click of a button.


### ERD

My Entity Relationship Diagram changed a bit based on what I learned about rails and how SQL databases work.

My first ERD had a one to many relationship of users to friends, and another one to many relationship of friends to event.

I found that I actually needed a one to many relationships of users to friends and also of users to events, while keeping the one to many relationship of friends to events.

- **My V1 ERD:**

![V1 ERD](./public/ERD-V1.png "v1 ERD")

- **My final version ERD** (notice all the bonus features from v1 are incorporated now):

![ERD](./public/ERD.png "final ERD")

### Wireframes

As always, I put together some wireframes to help me keep the end goal in mind. I found myself referring back to my wireframes on a daily basis. It does really help avoid scope screep.

![Wireframe](./public/wireframe.png "wireframe")

### User Stories

#### Main Features:
1. As a user, I want to create and save a friend with a first name, a last name, and a date of birth.
2. As a user, for each friend I want to be able to create and save events with an event category and an event date.
3. As a user, I want to see a notification when I successfully create a friend and/or an event.
4. As a user, I want to see a list of my friends and a list of all events with dates.
5. As a user, I want to see today’s events when I log in.

#### Authorization Features:
6. As a user, I want to sign up for an account or sign into an existing account using my email and password before I access the app so that my app data can be saved to my account.
7. As a logged in user, I want to click on a change password button and have the ability to change my password for my account so that I can edit my password if needed.
8. As a logged in user, I want to click a sign out button so that I can sign out of my account.
9. As a user, I want to receive a notification on sign up success and failure, sign in success and failure, change password success and failure, and sign out success and failure.

#### Extra Features:
10. As a user, I want to be automatically signed in once I sign up so that I don't have to complete the sign in form when I've just signed up.
11. As a user, I want to be able to add an action (optional text field) to events so I can keep track of what I want to do for my friend on their special day.
12. (after US11) As a user, I want to be able to view my past actions for friends’ events so that I have a record of what a good friend I am.
13. As a user, I want to filter what upcoming events I see by week, month, and year.
14. As a user, I want to see my events displayed in a calendar format.
15. As a user, I want to receive an email reminder on the day of each event.
16. (after US16) As a user, I want to customize the frequency of event email reminders.
17. As a user, I want my friends' upcoming birthdays to be automatically created as events based on their date of birth so that I don't have to manually add each birthday each year.

## Future Thinking
The extra features user stories above lay out the things I'm most interested in adding to this app moving forward.

I was able to complete user story 11 to store event actions (like gift ideas) on each event.

I was also able to complete user story 14 by rendering a calendar in my app using fullcalendar.io. I built the functionality to add all the user's events to the calendar.

**UPDATE 05/06/2019:**
Today I revisited my Evento code, 5 days after initially submitting it. I completed extra feature user story 17, which automatically adds friends' bithdays to the database and to the calendar view.

I created an ageCalculator method, which, combined with an ordinalSuffix method, gives age information on each created birthday event. The goal here was readability and usefulness for the end user. For example, an auto-created birthday will read like: Albus Dumbledore's 138th Birthday.

This function runs automatically when a new friend is created by the user so that the friends' birthday for the current year is automatically added to the database, to the user's account, and to the user's calendar view.

I also created a function that runs on sign in success that checks to see if the current date is January 1, indicating a new calendar year. If so, I grab the list of all friends stored in the database for that user, and add a birthday for the current year under that friend in the database. The event is rendered just as above (Albus Dumbledore's 138th Birthday) in the user's account and in their calendar view.

One area for improvement would be to run this function not if the date is 01-01 (like it currently is), but to run this function if the user has not logged on since January 1 of the current calendar year. This way, I wouldn't be banking on the user to log in on January 1 for the new years' birthdays to be auto-added into their account.  

## Wanna try it?

### [You can use Evento here!](https://kstrickland0612.github.io/evento-client/)

### [The deployed Heroku database lives here](https://sheltered-cliffs-69470.herokuapp.com/)

### [Take a look at my back-end repo here](https://github.com/kstrickland0612/evento-api)

Commit message:

Add feature updates to README

README.md, after:

# K Strickland's Evento App

Hello! Welcome to Evento. This app makes sure you never have to send a belated card, gift, or text ever again. It keeps track of your friends' birthdays and more, and tells you about the day's events each time you log on.

Evento is a full-stack app I built during my time at General Asssembly's Software Engineering Immersive. This was my first time building a database from scratch, and I really enjoyed diving into the back-end with Rails.

On the front-end, it was fun to think of the optimal user experience and work towards that with each new feature. By placing the user at the center of the project, I was able to think of some useful features to build that allowed me to flex a couple programming muscles I didn't know I had.

One of the best parts of this project is how much it stretched me to find answers on my own, and in the process really solidify concepts that I've been a bit unsure of.

I feel great about what I learned through this project.

Enjoy!

-K

## Technologies Used

* HTML5
* CSS3
* Bootstrap
* JavaScript
* jQuery
* Handlebars
* Ajax
* Ruby
* Rails
* Heroku
* fullcalendar.io
* moment.js

## Planning

My first step in planning this app was to determine MVP based on the requirements provided to me.

I set up a general schedule for myself with MVP features slated for the first two days of the project. I then added some scheduled time for debugging, layout, and extra features for the final two days.

As I worked through the project I identified extra features to work on, and because I hit MVP early in the project process I was able to prioritize working through the extra features I was most excited about.

## Challenges/Victories

- **Database structure**

My original plan for this project was to have a user resource, which had a one to many relationship with a friends resource (one user, many friends). I also wanted to create an events resource in a one to many relationship with friends (one friend, many events). With this being my first time building a back-end, I did not completely understand how user_id and references should work when you are dealing with owned resources.

Once I realized that I needed to add a user_id foreign key to my friend and users tables, the database change was very straightforward.

I also determined that my controllers needed to inherit from the ProtectedController, and was able to work through that configuration once I knew the end goal.

- **Populating a select dropdown with data from database**

My database is set up so that a friend has many events. If you want to create an event, you must tie it to a specific friend that you've already created. I didn't want the user to have to know the friend_id in order to create an event, so I built a solution with a select option list, handlebars, and a hidden input field. I created some methods to capture that friend_id without the user even knowing it. All they have to do is select from a dropdown list the friend they want to create the event under, and done!

- **Handlebars helpers**

These little things are so useful! I created a dateCompare helper that can tell me if an event is today, and from there display an appropriate message to my user. I also created a helper to format the dates in my app using moment.js to look like: Wednesday, September 2nd 2020.

- **Calendar view**

I made a stretch goal to display all events in calendar format for the user. I used fullcalendar.io to accomplish this. I did run into some bugs because of the fact that I was reading from old docs and certain features I was tryingt o use have been since depricated. I learned the importance of making sure you're in the right doc version :)

I'm proud of my updateCalendar function, which uses store as well as a .render() and .destroy() method to display an up-to-date calendar populated with all the user's events on the click of a button.


### ERD

My Entity Relationship Diagram changed a bit based on what I learned about rails and how SQL databases work.

My first ERD had a one to many relationship of users to friends, and another one to many relationship of friends to event.

I found that I actually needed a one to many relationships of users to friends and also of users to events, while keeping the one to many relationship of friends to events.

- **My V1 ERD:**

![V1 ERD](./public/ERD-V1.png "v1 ERD")

- **My final version ERD** (notice all the bonus features from v1 are incorporated now):

![ERD](./public/ERD.png "final ERD")

### Wireframes

As always, I put together some wireframes to help me keep the end goal in mind. I found myself referring back to my wireframes on a daily basis. It does really help avoid scope screep.

![Wireframe](./public/wireframe.png "wireframe")

### User Stories

#### Main Features:
1. As a user, I want to create and save a friend with a first name, a last name, and a date of birth.
2. As a user, for each friend I want to be able to create and save events with an event category and an event date.
3. As a user, I want to see a notification when I successfully create a friend and/or an event.
4. As a user, I want to see a list of my friends and a list of all events with dates.
5. As a user, I want to see today’s events when I log in.

#### Authorization Features:
6. As a user, I want to sign up for an account or sign into an existing account using my email and password before I access the app so that my app data can be saved to my account.
7. As a logged in user, I want to click on a change password button and have the ability to change my password for my account so that I can edit my password if needed.
8. As a logged in user, I want to click a sign out button so that I can sign out of my account.
9. As a user, I want to receive a notification on sign up success and failure, sign in success and failure, change password success and failure, and sign out success and failure.

#### Extra Features:
10. As a user, I want to be automatically signed in once I sign up so that I don't have to complete the sign in form when I've just signed up.
11. As a user, I want to be able to add an action (optional text field) to events so I can keep track of what I want to do for my friend on their special day.
12. (after US11) As a user, I want to be able to view my past actions for friends’ events so that I have a record of what a good friend I am.
13. As a user, I want to filter what upcoming events I see by week, month, and year.
14. As a user, I want to see my events displayed in a calendar format.
15. As a user, I want to receive an email reminder on the day of each event.
16. (after US16) As a user, I want to customize the frequency of event email reminders.
17. As a user, I want my friends' upcoming birthdays to be automatically created as events based on their date of birth so that I don't have to manually add each birthday each year.

## Future Thinking
The extra features user stories above lay out the things I'm most interested in adding to this app moving forward.

I was able to complete user story 11 to store event actions (like gift ideas) on each event.

I was also able to complete user story 14 by rendering a calendar in my app using fullcalendar.io. I built the functionality to add all the user's events to the calendar.

**UPDATE 05/06/2019:**
Today I revisited my Evento code, 5 days after initially submitting it. I completed extra feature user story 17, which automatically adds friends' bithdays to the database and to the calendar view.

I created an ageCalculator method, which, combined with an ordinalSuffix method, gives age information on each created birthday event. The goal here was readability and usefulness for the end user. For example, an auto-created birthday will read like: Albus Dumbledore's 138th Birthday.

This function runs automatically when a new friend is created by the user so that the friends' birthday for the current year is automatically added to the database, to the user's account, and to the user's calendar view.

I also created a function that runs on sign in success that checks to see if the current date is January 1, indicating a new calendar year. If so, I grab the list of all friends stored in the database for that user, and add a birthday for the current year under that friend in the database. The event is rendered just as above (Albus Dumbledore's 138th Birthday) in the user's account and in their calendar view.

One area for improvement would be to run this function not if the date is 01-01 (like it currently is), but to run this function if the user has not logged on since January 1 of the current calendar year. This way, I wouldn't be banking on the user to log in on January 1 for the new years' birthdays to be auto-added into their account.

 **UPDATE 05/10/2019:**
I improved on the last update by removing the function that creates the new years' birthdays on January 1st and replaced it with a much more comprehensive feature that does not rely on the user logging in on January 1st.

I added an addAnnualEvents function that takes any event just created and adds new events to the database if that original event is an annual event. I added logic to make birthdays and anniversaries default to be annual events, meaning future years' events will be automatically populated when the original event is created. I also added a checkbox that allows the user to indicate whether or not an event they are creating is annual. If the box is checked, future years' events will be automatically generated when the original event is created. I have set the annual events to get 5 years (future-looking) of auto-created instances of the event, though this range is very flexible in my code and can be easily edited.

On the back-end, I added an is_annaul boolean column to my events table.

This feature is a huge improvement on what I originally had. It gives the user the ability to make any type of event annual or one-time, and it auto-adds these events to the user's account and calendar view.

I enjoyed the practice with HTML input type="checkbox" and using checkboxes to manipulate data fields.

One area for improvement would be to create a filter in the event view in the user's account. Currently since so many events are auto-created with this new feature, that view can get pretty long and is not the most useful thing anymore. If the user has a way to filter through the data displayed in that view, it will be useful again. 

## Wanna try it?

### [You can use Evento here!](https://kstrickland0612.github.io/evento-client/)

### [The deployed Heroku database lives here](https://sheltered-cliffs-69470.herokuapp.com/)

### [Take a look at my back-end repo here](https://github.com/kstrickland0612/evento-api)
